Kafka roller 2 proposal (#2)
tinaselenge/proposals: 11x-new-kafka-roller.md

# Kafka Roller 2.0

## Current situation

The Kafka Roller is an internal Cluster Operator component that's responsible for coordinating the rolling restart or reconfiguration of Kafka pods when:
- non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied
- update in Kafka CR is detected
- a TLS certificate is renewed
- pods have been [manually annotated](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying#rolling_pods_manually_alternative_to_drain_cleaner) by the user for controlled restarts
- pod is stuck and has a pending update (e.g. not running with the desired version or configuration)
- Kafka broker is unresponsive to Kafka Admin connections

A pod is considered stuck if it is in one of following states:
- `CrashLoopBackOff`
- `ImagePullBackOff`
- `ContainerCreating`
- `Pending` and `Unschedulable`

> ### Known Issues

Reviewer: I think it might be worth changing this section. I think we have three categories here:

1. Known bugs
    - KafkaRoller takes a long time to reconcile mixed nodes if they are all in `Pending` state.
    - The quorum health check relies on the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` configuration, which is determined by the desired configuration values.

2. Existing code complex making it:
    - Hard to reason about what's going on
    - Hard to fix bugs, add features or generally refactor without introducing bugs
    - Hard to add new tests
4. Potential new features
    - Rolling brokers in parallel
    - Taking account of partition preferred leadership
    - Slowing down rolling updates

I wonder if we should split it out into the three sections. Then the motivation section below becomes something like:

```
The rolling of Kafka pods is a key role of the Strimzi cluster operator and therefore any changes to it should be made with as little risk as possible. Today refactoring the KafkaRoller is an inherently risky thing to do and has resulted in bugs being introduced while other changes were made. At the same time, since it is a key part of Strimzi we should expect that beyond the ones listed in this proposal it's likely that other new bugs or new features might come up.

We need to evolve the KafkaRoller in some way so that in future we can fix bugs and add new features with a higher level of certainty that we aren't introducing new bugs.

While we can address some of the known bugs and potential new features without changing the way the KafkaRoller works, there are some changes that require a fundamental change to the KafkaRoller so that it no longer considers nodes one by one.

The existing KafkaRoller suffers from the following shortcomings:
- Although it is safe and straightforward to restart one broker at a time, this process is slow in large clusters ([related issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/8547)).

> - It does not account for partition preferred leadership. As a result, there may be more leadership changes than necessary during a rolling restart, consequently impacting clients because they would need to reconnect everytime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It does not account for partition preferred leadership. As a result, there may be more leadership changes than necessary during a rolling restart, consequently impacting clients because they would need to reconnect every time.
```

The current code for KafkaRoller does not easily allow growth and adding new functionality such as batch rolling due to its complexity and nested conditions. It makes it challenging for users to debug and understand actions taken on their brokers when things go wrong and configure it correctly for their use cases. It is also not particularly easy to unit test which results in insufficient test coverage for many edge cases, making it challenging to refactor safely. 

As mentioned in `Known Issues` section, the current KafkaRoller still needs various changes and potentially more as we get more experience with KRaft and discover more issues. Adding these non trivial changes to a component that is very complex and hard to reason, is expensive and poses potential risks of introducing bugs because of tightly coupled logics and lack of testability.

Given the number of new features and changes related to KRaft, it is easiest to rewrite it from scratch rather than refactoring the existing component.  Rewriting with a more structured design, the process for evaluating nodes in various states would become more defined and easier to follow.

## Proposal

> The objective of this proposal is to introduce a new KafkaRoller with more structured design resembling a finite state machine. The finite station machine design will make it easier to introduce the following features:

Reviewer: I wonder if we can add more emphasis here on making the code easier to understand and evolve going forwards.
```suggestion
The objective of this proposal is to introduce a new KafkaRoller with more structured design resembling a finite state machine.
The primary motivation for this is to make it easier to reason about and rigorously test the code, allowing it to continue to be evolved in future with lower levels of risk than what we have today.
The finite station machine design will also be implemented keeping in mind the following features:
```

- Ability to roll brokers in parallel to speed up updates in large clusters.
- After restarting a broker, allow it to lead the partitions it is the preferred leader for. This will help reducing the impact on clients. 
- Ability to restart controller nodes in parallel when needed, to help recovering controller qourum.
- Add configurable wait time between restarts to allow slowing down rolling update.

The new roller will have the same behaviour of the current roller but with the additional features above, however, the implementation will be different following the finite state machine design. 

In this proposal term `node` refers to Kafka process that is either controller, broker or combined. When the term `pod` is used, it refers to the Kubernetes `Pod` resource where one of these Kafka processes is running inside.

## State Machine

> Kafka nodes will be observed to transition into states and based on these states, actions will be taken on the nodes, which would result in another state transitions. This process will be executed on the nodes in a specific order and will be repeated for each node until the desired state or the maximum number of attempts is reached. The order will depend on which role the node has and what the currently observed state. This will be similar to the order the current roller executes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka nodes will be observed to transition into states and based on these states, actions will be taken on the nodes, which would result in another state transition. This process will be executed on the nodes in a specific order and will be repeated for each node until the desired state or the maximum number of attempts is reached. The order will depend on which role the node has and what the currently observed state. This will be similar to the order the current roller executes:
```

> Kafka nodes will be observed to transition into states and based on these states, actions will be taken on the nodes, which would result in another state transitions. This process will be executed on the nodes in a specific order and will be repeated for each node until the desired state or the maximum number of attempts is reached. The order will depend on which role the node has and what the currently observed state. This will be similar to the order the current roller executes:

Reviewer: I'm not sure how useful this paragraph is, it's a lot of words and I'm not sure if it's actually needed. I'm wondering if for the user the key takeaway is something like this:
```
In the existing KafkaRoller a lot of the complexity comes from handling nodes that are in states other than Ready.
The Finite State Machine simplifies this by associating state with each node based on three sources (Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent, and Kafka Admin API) and then having explicit actions for each set of observed states. The KafkaRoller executes the actions until each node reaches the desired state, or the maximum number of attempts is reached.

The state sources will be abstracted so that state machine is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs. These abstractions will enable much better unit testing.
```

> 1. unready controllers

Reviewer: Is this the same order that we have today? If not we should be clear how it's different, if it's the same then maybe it doesn't need to be called out?

Author: It is slightly different because the current roller rolls nodes with controller role first whether they are combined or not, in whichever order. The new roller, breaks this down a little bit so that pure controllers get rolled first and then combined nodes since they have more impact on clients and potentially slower to come back up. However, I think it doesn't matter too much since it is a subtle improvement. To make the proposal simpler I can remove this and say we will stick to the same order to the current roller.

Reviewer: Ok yeah let's remove it and that improvement could always be added later

2. ready controllers 
3. unready combined nodes
4. ready combined nodes
5. active controller
6. unready brokers
7. ready brokers
where readiness is determined by Kubernetes Pod status.

If all nodes reached the desired state, the reconciliation will succeed, otherwise it will fail. There are also some conditions that could result in early termination of the process and immediately failing the reconciliation. This will be explained more later. 

Observation of a node is based on different sources such as Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent and Kafka Admin API. These sources will be abstracted so that state machine is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs. The abstractions also enable much better unit testing.

> ### States

Reviewer: These states don't relate to part about preferred partitions, where does that fit in?

Author: Since preferred leader is only relevant for broker nodes, I decided not to treat it as a state but a conditional action taken on broker nodes after a restart (mentioned in the Actions section).  Also if a broker is not the preferred leader, after the triggered election, we are not going to block the rolling based on it, so it didn't seem to be make it a state  that maps to definite action.

Reviewer: Ok that makes sense. In that case I think the implementation summary paragraph needs a tweak, I'll suggest an update.

In each reconciliation, number of attempts is tracked for each node. The number of attempts is how many times the overall process is repeated per node because of not reaching the desired state and the number of restarts is how many times a node is actually restarted. If any node has reached the maximum number of attempts or restarts, the reconciliation will fail. If the maximum number of reconfiguration is reached, then the node will marked to restart but will not fail the reconciliation. When a new reconcilation starts, these tracked number of actions taken on nodes will be reset.

The current roller also fails the reconciliation in the following situation to avoid continuing the process on more nodes:
- Cannot connect to KafkaAgent to check broker state metrics (KafkaAgent is crucial when determining safety before rolling nodes, so there is no point to try progress further, if we cannot connect to the KafkaAgent).
- Pod is not Running and does not have an old revision. (this will prevent the roller from restarting more nodes, which could result in making them stuck as well and bring down the entire cluster)

### Batch rolling

> Batch rolling is one of the major features that the new roller is introducing. The proposed algorithm is to group broker nodes without common partitions together for parallel restart while maintaining availability. The algorithm does not take rack information into an account and the reason for this is explained in the `Rejected Alternatives` section. One thing about batching brokers without rack awareness is that batch size would likely descrease as the roller progresses. It may eventually drop to one, in which case, remaining brokers would be restarted one by one. However, the majority of brokers would likely to get restarted in parallel and that would still speed the rolling in large clusters significantly. Of course, this is up for a discussion, not the final decision. 

Reviewer: Is the second part of this paragraph that talks about the batch size needed? Could we put it in a separate aside or something? Also I feel like we should drop the "Of course, this is up for a discussion, not the final decision." sentence.

Author: I put in a separate paragraph. I think it's still useful to mention how it works without rack awareness.

There is also an interesting future improvement that can make the batch rolling more effective optimizing with Cruise Control. This improvement will not be in the scope of this proposal but included in `Future Improvements` section.

> For this feature, a new configuration `maxBrokerBatchSize` will be added. This is the maximum number of brokers that can be restarted in parallel. This will be set to 1 by default therefore the default behaviour remains same as the current roller, restarting one broker at a time. Another configuration added for this feature is `dryRunForBatchRolling`. This will allow batching nodes without restarting them in parallel. The purpose to let the operator, to verify the effectiveness of this feature in their clusters before enabling it. 

Reviewer: We have these listed in configurability below, so do we need them here as well?

Author: I have removed this section.

The batching algorithm only applies to broker nodes, however, the capability to roll nodes in parallel will be used for controller nodes as well. This is needed when a controller quorum is in a bad state. [#9426](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426) mentioned in the `Known Issues` section, is an example of why this feature is important for controller nodes. The new roller will check if there are multiple controller nodes not working affecting the quorum, and restart them in parallel to help recovering it.

### Configurability 

The following are the configuration options for the new roller. Some of them are existing configurations that are used in the same way as the current roller. The new configurations are marked in <b>bold</b>. If exposed to user, the user can configure it via `STRIMZI_` environment variables. Otherwise, the operator will hard code them to the default values:

> | Configuration          | Default value | Exposed to user | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer: Can we refactor this table a bit to make it easier to review in the GitHub review tab? E.g. removing extra space, removing the bold markers and using `` instead, removing the word `The` from the sentences to make the sentences shorter etc.

Author: I have refactored it now, please let me know if it looks better or needs more changes.

This solution still has the limitation mentioned in the `Rejected Alternatives` section, that we can't be certain that other tooling hasn't reassigned some replicas since the last rebalance. In this case, the proposed algorithm can be used to check that brokers in the same set have no common partitions. This can be discussed further in the future.

### Testibility and Maintainibility

Currently both unit tests and system tests for the roller is limited in terms of the edge cases it covers. The way unit tests are currently structured and tightly coupled with sources of information used to determine whether to roll nodes makes it challenging to improve and extend the test to increase the coverage. The new roller will have completely newly structured unit tests that will cover the scenarios we test today and much more using the absracted sources of information. (TODO: I think this needs to be much more specific)

As part of this proposal (TODO: do we want a separate proposal for this) we will improve the existing system tests to increase the coverage:
TODO: explain how we would do this

Also add new system tests for parallel rolling will be added.

> ## Delivery plan

Reviewer: Should this be higher in the proposal? Since it's a key point of contention. We could put it before the `State Machine` section and maybe even rename `State Machine` to `Implementation Details`?

TODO: More detail on this section
Delivery order 
- The system tests improvement

> - Abstraction and utility classes that can be used by the current roller (but do we bother integrating it into the current roller? does that pose risks of breaking the current roller?)

Reviewer: I've been thinking on this and wondering whether we want to say this upfront in the proposal, or just have the proposal contain only the part about system test improvements and then a part about delivering the new KafkaRoller behind a feature gate. Then we can see as we implement it how much we want to add in advance and how much just stays in the big PR

Author: I wonder if we should create an issue to improve the system tests separately and then just reference it somewhere here, rather than it being part of this proposal.

Reviewer: Yeah I think that's a good idea. @im-konge what do you think?

- One big PR for rest of the implementation, unit tests and new system tests for batch rolling.

### Feature Gate

The switch from the old roller to the new roller should be controlled by a new feature gate called `UseNewKafkaRoller`.
With this feature gate disabled, the operator will continue using the old KafkaRoller.
With it enabled, the new roller will be used.

> The following table shows the expected graduation of the feature gate:

Reviewer: I don't think we need to list explicit versions here, but maybe just say that we expect it to remain in Alpha for 2 releases, then Beta for at least 2 if not more until we are happy all the problems are ironed out.

| Phase | Strimzi versions       | Default state                                          |
|:------|:-----------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| Alpha | 0.46, ?                | Disabled by default                                    |
| Beta  | ? , ?                  | Enabled by default                                     |
| GA    | ?, ?                   | Enabled by default (without possibility to disable it) |

Currently, I'm not sure what would be the feature gate timeline as it is subject to change based on the actual progress.
However, each phase probably will take at least 2 releases. 

> TODO: Who will enable and test it? How long do we expect to be alpha and beta state to trust? 

Reviewer: We can call out here that we already have one community user of Strimzi (Reddit) who have said they will test it. Perhaps we can write down other vendors here as well if we get commitment from them.

We vaguely talked in the past about having a logging only mechanism where you get to see what it would do but it doesn't actually restart anything, do we want anything like that? I guess we could ask Reddit if they would find that useful for their testing

Author: > We vaguely talked in the past about having a logging only mechanism where you get to see what it would do but it doesn't actually restart anything, do we want anything like that? I guess we could ask Reddit if they would find that useful for their testing

I think `dryRunForBatchRolling` was added to provide that but thinking about it more, not sure how that would work just for batch rolling. Maybe it can be changed to dryRunNewRoller so that all the actions taken by the roller would be just logged. Would it really help users though? Would they look through long lines logs to figure out whether to it's doing the right thing? Maybe this dry run is not that useful for them. We want people to test this on real clusters (but still non prod I guess) to identify issues and fix them. So allowing users to dry run doesn't help us either.

Reviewer: I'm really torn about whether the dry run part is useful. Maybe we should omit it and then see if anyone asks for it?

Author: I also think we should omit and reconsider if anyone asks about it, so removed this from the table.

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only
the [`strimzi-kafka-operator`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator).

## Compatibility

> The new KafkaRoller introduced by this proposal will used only for KRaft based clusters. 

Reviewer: Let's remove this since ZooKeeper is removed now

# Kafka Roller 2.0

## Current situation

The Kafka Roller is an internal Cluster Operator component that's responsible for coordinating the rolling restart or reconfiguration of Kafka pods when:
- non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied
- update in Kafka CR is detected
- a TLS certificate is renewed
- pods have been [manually annotated](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying#rolling_pods_manually_alternative_to_drain_cleaner) by the user for controlled restarts
- pod is stuck and has a pending update (e.g. not running with the desired version or configuration)
- Kafka broker is unresponsive to Kafka Admin connections

A pod is considered stuck if it is in one of following states:
- `CrashLoopBackOff`
- `ImagePullBackOff`
- `ContainerCreating`
- `Pending` and `Unschedulable`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if we are missing some details here for those who aren't as familiar with the current KafkaRoller. Based on points we have elsewhere I wonder if we should include something like:
```
Some relevant internal details of the existing KafkaRoller are:
- The KafkaRoller processes one node at a time.
- If KafkaRoller encounters an error while processing a node the KafkaRoller will (depending on the error) fail the reconciliation loop or retry processing the node after a delay.
- For each node the KafkaRoller will try to process it up to 10 times before failing the reconciliation (this number is hard-coded).
- If the KafkaRoller encounters an error trying to reconfigure a node, rather than retry it simply restarts the node.
```

### Known bugs

> - KafkaRoller takes a long time to reconcile combined nodes if they are all in Pending stateMore information can be found [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426).

Reviewer: Formatting update to match the other sections, also added some extra context.
```suggestion
- KafkaRoller takes a long time to reconcile combined nodes if they are all in Pending state.
This is related to the way the KafkaRoller considers nodes one by one so a fix for this is not possible without making non-trivial changes to the KafkaRoller.
More information can be found [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426).
```

> - The quorum health check relies on the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` configuration, which is determined by the desired configuration values. However, during certificate reconciliation or manual rolling updates, KafkaRoller doesn't have access to these desired configuration values since they shouldn't prompt any configuration changes. As a result, the quorum health check defaults to using the hard-coded default value.

Reviewer: Formatting and rewording
```suggestion
- Quorum health checks are sometimes based on incorrect configuration values.
The quorum health check relies on the `controller.quorum.fetch.timeout.ms` configuration, which is determined by the desired configuration values.
However, during certificate reconciliation or manual rolling updates, KafkaRoller doesn't have access to these desired configuration values since they shouldn't prompt any configuration changes.
As a result, the quorum health check uses the hard-coded default value which may not be the actual current value.
```

### Shortcomings of the existing code:

- Hard to reason about what's going on. 
The code is complex to understand and it's not easy to determine why a pod was restarted from logs that tend to be noisy.
- Hard to fix bugs, add features or generally refactor without introducing bugs.

> The code for KafkaRoller does not easily allow growth and adding new functionality such as batch rolling due to its complexity, nested conditions and insufficient test coverage for many edge cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complexity of the code, the presence of many nested conditions and test coverage which doesn't sufficiently cover edge cases and is very brittle to code changes means the KafkaRoller does not easily allow growth and adding new functionality such as batch rolling.
```

- Hard to add new tests.

> The way unit tests are currently structured and tightly coupled with sources of information used to determine whether to roll nodes makes it challenging to improve and extend the test to increase the coverage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way unit tests are currently structured and tightly coupled with sources of information used to determine whether to roll nodes makes it challenging to improve and extend the tests to increase the coverage.
```

### Potential improvements:

- Rolling brokers in parallel.
Although it is safe and straightforward to restart one broker at a time, this process is slow in large clusters ([related issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/8547)).

> - Taking account of partition preferred leadership.

Reviewer: Do we have any issues or discussions we can point to for these last two for where people have asked for them?

This would cause less leadership changes, consequently impacting clients less because they would not need to reconnect every time.
- Slowing down rolling update.
Being able to configure how long to wait between restart of brokers is useful for clusters that are extra sensitive to rolling updates.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The finite station machine design will also be implemented keeping in mind the following features:
- Ability to roll brokers in parallel to speed up updates in large clusters.
- After restarting a broker, allow it to lead the partitions it is the preferred leader for.
This will help reduce the impact on clients.
- Ability to restart controller nodes in parallel when needed, to help recovering controller quorum.
- Add configurable wait time between restarts to allow slowing down rolling updates.

The new roller will have the same behaviour of the current roller but with the additional features above, however, the implementation will be different following the finite state machine design.

In this proposal term `node` refers to the Kafka process that is either controller, broker or combined.
When the term `pod` is used, it refers to the Kubernetes `Pod` resource where a Kafka process is running.

## Implementation details

In the existing KafkaRoller a lot of the complexity comes from handling nodes that are in states other than Ready.

> The Finite State Machine simplifies this by associating state with each node based on three sources (Kubernetes API, KafkaAgent, and Kafka Admin API) and then having explicit actions for each set of observed states. The KafkaRoller executes the actions until each node reaches the desired state, or the maximum number of attempts is reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Finite State Machine simplifies this by associating a state with each node based on multiple sources (Kubernetes API and KafkaAgent) and then having explicit actions for each observed state.
The KafkaRoller executes the actions until each node reaches the desired state, or the maximum number of attempts is reached.
```

> The state sources will be abstracted so that the state machine is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs. These abstractions will enable much better unit testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state sources will be abstracted so that the state machine is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs.
These abstractions will enable much better unit testing.
```

### States

> - UNKNOWN (initial/default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- UNKNOWN (initial/default)
```

- NOT_RUNNING
- NOT_READY
- RECOVERING
- READY (desired state)

> ### Observation sources and information collected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Observation sources and information collected

The state of a node is determined based on information collected from the Kubernetes API and KafkaAgent.
The Kafka Admin API is also used as a source of information to determine whether a broker is leading all preferred partitions or not.
```

- Kubernetes API
  - Pod is not Running and is one of CrashLoopBackOff, ImagePullBackOff, ContainerCreating and PendingAndUnschedulable
  - Pod is Running but lacking Ready status
  - Pod is Running and Ready

- KafkaAgent: It collects and expose Kafka metric [Broker State](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/3.7/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java)
  - Broker state is 2 (RECOVERY)
  - Broker state is not 2 (RECOVERY)

- Kafka Admin API
  - Leading all preferred partitions
  - Not leading all preferred partitions

### Actions

> - `Observe` - This is a function to transition a node's state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- `Observe` - This is a function to transition a node's state.
```

- `Wait and observe` - This is to repeat the `Observe` function until the desired state or timeout is reached.
- `Restart` - Delete a pod via Kubernetes API and then `Wait and Observe`. This action is followed by a preferred leader election trigger via Kafka Admin API for a broker node if it is not leading its preferred replicas yet.
- `Reconfigure` - Apply configuration updates via Kafka Admin API and then `Wait and Observe`.
- `No action` - This means we reached the desired state after taking one of the above actions or no action is needed.

### Observations -> States Map

> | KubeAPI | KafkaAgent | States |

Reviewer: ```suggestion

| KubeAPI | KafkaAgent | States |
```

| :--------------- | :--------------- | :---------------
| - | - | UNKNOWN
| Pod is not Running | - | NOT_RUNNING
| Pod is Running but lacking Ready status | Broker state != 2 | NOT_READY
| Pod is Running but lacking Ready status | Broker state == 2 | RECOVERING
| Pod is Running and Ready | - | READY

### States -> Actions Map

> | States | Actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion

| States | Actions
```

Therefore, it's important to avoid restarting the node during this process, as doing so would restart the entire log recovery, potentially causing the node to enter a loop of continuous restarts without becoming ready.
Moreover, while a node is in recovery, no other node should be restarted, as this could impact cluster availability and affect the client.

`NOT_READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason and have not been restarted yet.
If it is not ready after being restarted already, we don't want to restart any other nodes to avoid taking down more nodes.

`READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason.
If they don't have a restart reason but need to be reconfigured, they will be reconfigured.
If no reconfiguration is needed, then no action will be taken on these nodes.

If all nodes reach the desired state, the reconciliation will succeed, otherwise it will fail.
There are also some conditions that could result in early termination of the process and immediately failing the reconciliation.
This will be explained more later.

### High level flow diagram describing the flow of the states
![The new roller flow](./images/06x-new-roller-flow.png)

> ### State machine cycles

Reviewer: I feel like this section is hard to follow, so I suggest as a starting point we move the parts about the current KafkaRoller higher up (I added a separate comment for that).

Author: I have tried to simplify this section a little bit.

> As previously mentioned, the process for nodes will be repeated unless the maximum attempt is reached, in which case the reconciliation fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As previously mentioned, if a node is not in the desired state the process will be repeated unless the maximum number of attempts is reached, in which case the reconciliation fails.
```

The maximum number of attempts is hard-coded to 10 in the current roller.
It will be the same for the new roller, however this value will be further broken down.
The new roller will add 2 other hard-coded maximum attempt values.
One is for the maximum number of restarts and one is for the maximum number of reconfigurations that can be taken on each node.
This is because we want to limit how many times a node can be restarted in each reconciliation because restarting a node 10 times is not productive.
Also, in the current roller, if we failed to reconfigure a node, we immediately restart it.
Reconfiguration can fail sometimes due to transitive error so it would be useful to retry the reconfiguration a few times before we decide to restart a node.

In each reconciliation, the number of attempts is tracked for each node.
The number of attempts is how many times the overall process is repeated per node because of not reaching the desired state and the number of restarts is how many times a node is actually restarted.

> If any node has reached the maximum number of attempts or restarts, the reconciliation will fail.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow the need for this. As I understand it nodes will either need to be reconfigured or restarted. A node that needs to be reconfigured will only be restarted if it fails to be reconfigured 10 times. In that case if the restart fails then the number of attempts is now 10 so we would fail anyway. Is the reason for tracking the attempts, restarts and reconfigurations so that you could set e.g. reconfigurations to 5, restarts to 10 and overall attempts to 10, so then if it failed to be reconfigured 5 times you would then only restart 5 times before failing? Is the idea that we can refine the hard-coded values in future?

Author: The overall max attempt is used to track not restart and reconfiguration but how many times we are repeating the overall process per node. For example, if node is in log recovery or not meeting the safety conditions,  this process is counted towards to the overall attempt.

It is true that if we fail to restart 10 times, the reconciliation will fail anyway but it seemed to not that productive to restart a node that many times. This way we fail early on this unrecoverable situation. I don't know how strong this argument is to have this separate limit though.

Author: So actually this part needs updating. I think these attempts are exclusive and used in different situations:
- maxAttempts - tracks how many times we checked and waited for node readiness because of log recovery or did not meet safety condition to restart
- maxRestarts - tracks how many times we restarted a node (could be because it was unhealthy and no admin connection can be made)
- maxReconfigurations - tracks how many times we attempted or did configure (could be because Admin requests failed)

It might be simpler to not have maxRestarts and just use the maxAttempts, so it is same as the current roller.

Author: I have thought about this little bit more and looked into how the current roller works again. The current roller will retry the node if it failed to restart it, not if it has successfully restarted it. If the node was restarted successfully but doesn't become ready within the timeout, it fails the reconciliation immediately. 

The new roller probably should follow this behaviour, so maxRestarts does not quite fit well. If node was restarted but then not ready, we will not be retrying this node, so very unlikely we will reach the maxRestarts. So I'm leaning towards removing it actually.

Reviewer: So in summary I think you're suggesting (and I am happy with what I think you're suggesting):
- KafkaRoller has max attempts hard coded to 10 (like it is today)
- Max attempts increments each time we:
    - Wait due to log recovery
    - Wait due to node not ready
    - Fail to reconfigure a node
    - Fail to restart a node
    - Successfully reconfigure a node
    - Successfully restart a node
- We will separately track number of reconfiguration failures
- If we hit the max reconfigurations we will stop trying to reconfigure and switch to trying to restart

Is that right?

Author: So the current behaviour is we retry node (each time we retry attempt is incremented and checks if max attempt is reached):
- Pod does not exist yet
- Wait due to log recovery 
- Not satisfied safety conditions (availability and quorum health) for a restart 
- Fail to restart a node
- Fail to get configurations of a node (Admin client request failed)

When fail to reconfigure a node (Admin request failed), we mark the node to get restarted. 
When successfully reconfigure a node, no retry happens
When successfully restart a node, no retry happens
When node not ready after a successful restart/reconfiguration, we fail the reconciliation, no retry happens.
When node not ready after going through all the logics, but there was no restart, we fail the reconciliation, no retry happens.

> We will separately track number of reconfiguration failures
If we hit the max reconfigurations we will stop trying to reconfigure and switch to trying to restart

That's right. And I think we leave rest of the behaviour as it is.

Author: I have removed the maxNumRestarts and reworded the paragraph a little bit.

If the maximum number of reconfiguration is reached, then the node will be marked to restart but will not fail the reconciliation.

> When a new reconciliation starts, the tracked number of actions taken on nodes will be reset.

Reviewer: Does this mean that the number of actions is saved between separate calls to the KafkaRoller within the same reconciliation? So if it fails twice when CaReconciler initiated a roll, then it can only fail 8 times when KafkaReconciler initiates it within the same reconciliation?

Author: The number of actions is only store per KafkaRoller instance so CaReconciler, KafkaReconciler's manual rolling update and rolling update will have their own instances initiated therefore the number of actions is not saved between them. When reconciliation fails, these reconcile steps will reinitialise the KafkaRoller instance, so the number of action is reset.

The current roller also fails the reconciliation in the following situation to avoid continuing the process on more nodes:
- Cannot connect to KafkaAgent to check broker state metrics (KafkaAgent is crucial when determining safety before rolling nodes, so there is no point to try to progress further, if we cannot connect to the KafkaAgent).

> - Pod is not Running and does not have an old revision (this will prevent the roller from restarting more nodes, which could result in making them stuck as well and bring down the entire cluster).

Reviewer: It's not clear whether this behaviour is being kept in the new KafkaRoller or not

Author: I think I should remove this paragraph since this is just following what the current roller does already. I think it gets covered by what you suggested for Current Situation section:
```
- If KafkaRoller encounters an error while processing a node the KafkaRoller will (depending on the error) fail the reconciliation loop or retry processing the node after a delay.
```

### Batch rolling

Batch rolling is one of the major features that the new roller is introducing.

> The proposed algorithm is to group broker nodes without common partitions together for parallel restart while maintaining availability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When batch rolling is enabled, the broker batching algorithm in the roller will group broker nodes without common partitions together and restart them in parallel while maintaining availability.
```

The proposed algorithm does not take rack information into account and the reason for this is explained in the `Rejected Alternatives` section.

> When batching brokers without rack awareness is that batch size would likely decrease as the roller progresses and potentially result in brokers that cannot be batched together so they would be restarted one by one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the roller is not using rack information, the batch size would likely decrease as the roller progresses and potentially result in brokers that cannot be batched together and must be restarted one by one.
```

> However, the majority of brokers would likely to get restarted in parallel and that would still speed the rolling in large clusters significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the majority of brokers would likely be restarted in parallel, so this would still speed up the rolling of large clusters significantly compared to rolling each broker one by one.
```

> There is also an interesting future improvement that can make the batch rolling more effective optimizing with Cruise Control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also an interesting future improvement that can make the batch rolling more effective by optimizing leader and replica placement with Cruise Control.
```

This improvement will not be in the scope of this proposal but included in `Future Improvements` section.

The batching algorithm only applies to broker nodes, however, the capability to roll nodes in parallel will be used for controller nodes as well.
This is needed when a controller quorum is in a bad state.
[#9426](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9426) mentioned in the `Known Issues` section, is an example of why this feature is important for controller nodes.

> The new roller will check if there are multiple controller nodes not working affecting the quorum, and restart them in parallel to help recover it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new roller will check if there are multiple controller nodes not working affecting the quorum, and restart them in parallel to help recover it.
Unlike the batch rolling of brokers, the user cannot disable the roller from batch rolling the controllers.
This is because the batch rolling will only be used in the case where multiple controllers are unavailable, affecting the quorum.
```

### Configurability

The following are the configuration options for the new roller.
Some of them are existing configurations that are used in the same way as the current roller.
The new configurations are `highlighted`.
If exposed to the user, the user can configure it via `STRIMZI_` environment variables.
Otherwise, the operator will hard code them to the default values:

| Configuration | Default value | Exposed to user | Description |
|:--------------|:--------------|:----------------| :-----------|
| maxAttempts | 10 | No | Maximum number of times a node can be attempted after not reaching the desired state.  This is checked against the node's `numAttempts`.                                                                                                                      |

> | operationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds | Yes | Maximum amount of time we will wait for nodes to transition to `READY` state after an action. This is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| operationTimeoutMs | 60 seconds | Yes | Maximum amount of time to wait for nodes to transition to `READY` state after an action. This is already exposed to the user via environment variable `STRIMZI_OPERATION_TIMEOUT_MS`. |
```

| `postRestartDelayMs` | 0 | Yes | Delay to apply between node(s) restarts to slow down the rolling update. It will be exposed to the user via the new environment variable `STRIMZI_POST_RESTART_DELAY_SECONDS`.|
| `preferredLeaderElectionDelayMs` | 10 seconds | No | Delay to apply after a node restart and before triggering partition leader election. This is to avoid situations where leaders are moving to a newly started node that does not yet have established networking to some outside networks, e.g. through load balancers. |

### Testing

Currently both unit tests and system tests for the roller are limited in terms of the edge cases it covers. There is a plan to improve system tests so that both old and new roller can be tested more rigorously (refers to this issue here). There will also be new system tests added for batch rolling scenarios as part of this proposal implementation.
The way unit tests are currently structured and tightly coupled with sources of information used to determine whether to roll nodes makes it challenging to improve and extend the test to increase the coverage.

> The new roller will have completely newly structured unit tests that will cover the current test scenarios as well as more using the abstracted sources of information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently both unit tests and system tests for the roller are limited in terms of the edge cases they cover.
A separate issue has been raised to improve the system tests so that both old and new roller can be tested more rigorously (refers to this issue here).
The new system tests should be added before the new roller is GA'd.

As part of the implementation of this proposal we will add:
- Unit tests for the new roller which cover the current unit test scenarios as well as other behaviour changes and edge cases that are not currently covered.
- New system tests to cover batch rolling scenarios and any other behaviour changes compared to the old roller.
```

| Beta  | Enabled by default  |
| GA    | Enabled by default (without possibility to disable it) |

We expect to remain in Alpha for 2 releases, then in Beta for at least 2 releases, if not more until we are happy that issues are ironed out and the roller is running stable.

Reddit is one of the Strimzi vendors that offered to test the new roller while it's in Alpha and Beta phase.

### Future improvement

In the future, we can optimize Cruise Control's `BrokerSetAwareGoal` to make the batch rolling more efficient when the user enables Cruise Control in their clusters.
This goal operates at the level of broker sets, which may correspond to physical or logical boundaries like racks, data centres, availability zones or custom logical groupings defined by administrators.
It ensures that replicas of a partition are not assigned to the same broker set by spreading them across sets as evenly as possible.
The new roller could then restart brokers in the same set in parallel while maintaining availability of partitions.
This goal can be used for both rack aware and non rack aware clusters, compared to `RackAwareGoal` which relies on Kafka's built-in `broker.rack` property.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This solution still has the limitation mentioned in the `Rejected Alternatives` section, that we can't be certain that other tooling hasn't reassigned some replicas since the last rebalance.
In this case, the proposed algorithm can be used to check that brokers in the same set have no common partitions.
This can be discussed further in the future.

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only

> the [`strimzi-kafka-operator`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal affects only the [`strimzi-kafka-operator`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator).
```

## Compatibility

The new KafkaRoller introduced by this proposal will be used only for KRaft based clusters.

> The purpose of this proposal is to maintain the same behaviour of the old roller with a finite state machine design while adding the new features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the new roller does not use any different sources of information than the existing roller it will be backwards compatible.
The main behavioural change in the new roller is rolling brokers in batches, so this will be disabled by default.
```

## Rejected

- Why not use rack information when batching brokers that can be restarted at the same time?
When all replicas of all partitions have been assigned in a rack-aware way then brokers in the same rack trivially share no partitions, and so racks provide a safe partitioning.

> However nothing in a broker, controller or cruise control is able to enforce the rack-aware property therefore assuming this property is unsafe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However nothing in a broker, controller or Cruise Control is able to enforce the rack-aware property therefore assuming this property is unsafe.
```

Even if CC is being used and rack aware replicas is a hard goal we can't be certain that other tooling hasn't reassigned some replicas since the last rebalance, or that no topics have been created in a rack-unaware way.

- Why not refactor the existing KafkaRoller rather than rewriting as a new component?

> It is also not particularly easy to unit test which resulted in insufficient test coverage for many edge cases, making it challenging to refactor safely.  The past experience of adding non trivial changes to it has proven to be expensive and more risky of introducing bugs because of tightly coupled logics and lack of testability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing roller is not particularly easy to unit test which has resulted in insufficient test coverage for many edge cases, making it challenging to refactor safely.
The past experience of adding non trivial changes to it has proven to be expensive, with a high risk of introducing bugs because of tightly coupled logics and lack of testability.
```

> Rewriting with a more structured design that is easier to follow and test and then released under a `Feature gate` is safer and allows the community to try and test it until we are confident.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rewriting with a more structured design that is easier to follow and test and then released under a `Feature gate` is safer and allows the community to try and test it until we are confident.
Also if we discover a high priority bug with the new roller it is much easier for users to disable a feature flag, than for the Strimzi community to revert changes and potentially have to put out fix releases.
```

# Kafka Roller 2.0

## Current situation

The Kafka Roller is an internal Cluster Operator component that's responsible for coordinating the rolling restart or reconfiguration of Kafka pods when:

> - non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- non-dynamic reconfigurations need to be applied
```

> - non-dynamic reconfigurations needs to be applied

Reviewer: KafkaRoller also handles dynamic reconfiguration AFAIU
```suggestion
- reconfigurations need to be applied (dynamic or non-dynamic)
```

> - update in Kafka CR is detected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- an update in Kafka CR is detected
```

- `Reconfigure` - Apply configuration updates via Kafka Admin API and then `Wait and Observe`.
- `No action` - This means we reached the desired state after taking one of the above actions or no action is needed.

### Observations -> States Map

| KubeAPI | KafkaAgent | States |
| :--------------- | :--------------- | :---------------
| - | - | UNKNOWN
| Pod is not Running | - | NOT_RUNNING
| Pod is Running but lacking Ready status | Broker state != 2 | NOT_READY
| Pod is Running but lacking Ready status | Broker state == 2 | RECOVERING
| Pod is Running and Ready | - | READY

### States -> Actions Map

| States | Actions
| :--------------- | :---------------
| UNKNOWN | `Observe`
| NOT_RUNNING | `Restart` OR `Wait and observe`
| RECOVERING | `Wait and observe`
| NOT_READY | `Restart` OR `Wait and observe`
| READY | `Restart` OR `Reconfigure` OR `No action`

Some states map to multiple possible actions, but only one of them is taken based on the other conditions.

`UNKNOWN` nodes will be observed.
This is the initial/default state before observation.

`NOT_RUNNING` nodes will restart only if the pod has an old revision (is out of date).

> This is because, if the node is not running at all, then restarting it likely won't make any difference unless the node is out of date.

Reviewer: This is something that the KafkaRoller does today right? If so can we change this to the below and remove the next two sentences?
```suggestion
This is in line with the existing KafkaRoller because if the node is not running at all, then restarting it likely won't make any difference unless the node is out of date.
```

> For example, if a pod is in pending state due to misconfigured affinity rule, there is no point restarting this pod again or restarting other pods, because that would leave them in pending state as well.
> If the user then fixes the misconfigured affinity rule, then we should detect that the pod has an old revision, therefore should restart it so that the pod is scheduled correctly and runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

`RECOVERING` nodes will be waited and observed only.

> A Kafka node can take a long time to become ready while performing log recovery and it's not easy to determine how long it might take.

Reviewer: Similarly here, this isn't a change in behaviour so we can maybe cut some of the explanation. I think we should keep the sentence about not restarting any other noes, but can
```suggestion
Like the existing KafkaRoller, we will avoid restarting a node during log recovery as doing so does not help the node recover more quickly.
```

> Therefore, it's important to avoid restarting the node during this process, as doing so would restart the entire log recovery, potentially causing the node to enter a loop of continuous restarts without becoming ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

`NOT_READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason and have not been restarted yet.
If it is not ready after being restarted already, we don't want to restart any other nodes to avoid taking down more nodes.

`READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason.
If they don't have a restart reason but need to be reconfigured, they will be reconfigured.
If no reconfiguration is needed, then no action will be taken on these nodes.

If all nodes reach the desired state, the reconciliation will succeed.

### High level flow diagram describing the flow of the states
![The new roller flow](./images/06x-new-roller-flow.png)

### State machine cycles

if a node is not in the desired state the process will be repeated unless the maximum number of attempts is reached or an error encountered while processing the node in which case the reconciliation fails.
The maximum number of attempts is hard-coded to 10 in the current roller.
It will be the same for the new roller, however there will be 2 other hard-coded maximum values added:
- Maximum number of restarts that can be done for each node in a single reconciliation.

> - Maximum number of reconfigurations that can be attempted on each node before restarting the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Maximum number of dynamic reconfigurations that can be attempted on each node before restarting the node.
```

This is because restarting a node 10 times in every reconciliation is not productive.
Also, in the current roller, if we failed to reconfigure a node, we immediately restart it.
Reconfiguration can fail sometimes due to transitive error so it would be useful to retry the reconfiguration a few times before we decide to restart a node.

The maximum number of attempts is how many times the overall process is repeated per node because of not reaching the desired state and the number of restarts is how many times a node is actually restarted.
If any node has reached the maximum number of attempts or restarts, the reconciliation will fail.
If the maximum number of reconfiguration is reached, then the node will be marked to restart but will not fail the reconciliation.

> When a new KafkaRoller instance is initiated either because it's a new reconciliation or a different reconcile step, the tracked number of actions taken on nodes will be reset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new rolling update is initiated (i.e. when a new KafkaRoller instance is created either because it's a new reconciliation or a different reconcile step), the tracked number of actions taken on nodes will be reset.
```

| `maxReconfigAttempts`| 3 | No | Maximum number of dynamic reconfiguration attempts per node before restarting the node. This is checked against node's `numReconfigAttempts`. |
| `maxBrokerBatchSize` | 1 | Yes | Maximum number of broker nodes that can be restarted in parallel. It will be exposed to the user via the new environment variable `STRIMZI_MAX_RESTART_BATCH_SIZE`. |
| `postRestartDelayMs` | 0 | Yes | Delay to apply between node(s) restarts to slow down the rolling update. It will be exposed to the user via the new environment variable `STRIMZI_POST_RESTART_DELAY_SECONDS`.|
| `preferredLeaderElectionDelayMs` | 10 seconds | No | Delay to apply after a node restart and before triggering partition leader election. This is to avoid situations where leaders are moving to a newly started node that does not yet have established networking to some outside networks, e.g. through load balancers. |

### Testing

Currently both unit tests and system tests for the roller are limited in terms of the edge cases they cover.

> A separate issue has been raised to improve the system tests so that both old and new roller can be tested more rigorously (refers to this issue here).

Reviewer: Adding a comment to remind us to raise and link the issue here

The new system tests should be added before the new roller is GA'd.
As part of the implementation of this proposal we will add:
- Unit tests for the new roller which cover the current unit test scenarios as well as other behaviour changes and edge cases that are not currently covered.
- New system tests to cover batch rolling scenarios and any other behaviour changes compared to the old roller.

## Feature Gate

The switch from the old roller to the new roller should be controlled by a new feature gate called `UseNewKafkaRoller`.
With this feature gate disabled, the operator will continue using the old KafkaRoller.
With it enabled, the new roller will be used.
The following table shows the expected graduation of the feature gate:
| Phase |  Default state |
|:------|:---------------|
| Alpha | Disabled by default |
| Beta  | Enabled by default  |
| GA    | Enabled by default (without possibility to disable it) |

We expect to remain in Alpha for 2 releases, then in Beta for at least 2 releases, if not more until we are happy that issues are ironed out and the roller is running stable.

> Reddit is one of the Strimzi vendors that offered to test the new roller while it's in Alpha and Beta phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reddit is one of the Strimzi vendors that offered to test the new roller, and particularly the roller when running in batch mode while it's in Alpha and Beta phase.
```

Today refactoring the KafkaRoller is an inherently risky thing to do and has resulted in bugs being introduced while other changes were made.
At the same time, since it is a key part of Strimzi we should expect that beyond the ones listed in this proposal it's likely that other new bugs or new features might come up.

We need to evolve the KafkaRoller in some way so that in future we can fix bugs and add new features with a higher level of certainty that we aren't introducing new bugs.

While we can address some of the known bugs and potential new features without changing the way the KafkaRoller works, there are some changes that require a fundamental change to the KafkaRoller so that it no longer considers Kafka pods one by one.

## Proposal

The objective of this proposal is to introduce a new KafkaRoller with a more structured design resembling a finite state machine.
The primary motivation for this is to make it easier to reason about and rigorously test the code, allowing it to continue to be evolved in future with lower levels of risk than what we have today.

> The finite station machine design will also be implemented keeping in mind the following features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The finite state machine design will also be implemented keeping in mind the following features:
```

- Add configurable wait time between restarts to allow slowing down rolling updates.

The new roller will have the same behaviour of the current roller but with the additional features above, however, the implementation will be different following the finite state machine design.

In this proposal term `node` refers to the Kafka process that is either controller, broker or combined.
When the term `pod` is used, it refers to the Kubernetes `Pod` resource where a Kafka process is running.

## Implementation details

In the existing KafkaRoller a lot of the complexity comes from handling nodes that are in states other than Ready.
The Finite State Machine simplifies this by associating a state with each node based on multiple sources (Kubernetes API and KafkaAgent) and then having explicit actions for each observed state.
The KafkaRoller executes the actions until each node reaches the desired state, or the maximum number of attempts is reached.

The state sources will be abstracted so that the state machine is not dependent on their specifics as long as it's getting the information it needs.
These abstractions will enable much better unit testing.

> ### States

Reviewer 2: A more general comment on the FSM.
Within an FSM you should clarify the states, the actions and the outcomes.
The FSM transition from one state to the other because of a specific action and at the same time it can produce an outome (or nothing, just the transition).
In the following sections I can understand the states definition but I am not sure what are observations and how they differ from actions. I mean, the FSM transitions from state A to B because an action happens, which could be the result of a call to an Kube API. I read actions and observations being a different things here and triggering state transitions IIUC. I think we should convey in just one thing.
Also the tables "Observations -> States Map" and "States -> Actions Map" aren't really clear to me.
Finally the diagram. In a FSM diagram you don't want states duplication. Each state has to be one time in the picture and specifying what's the action triggering the transition on the arrow which represents the transition itself.
Sorry to be so pedantic with FSMs (even Shubham knows about that) but I spent my previous life writing FSMs for embedded devices (they are ALL state machines) :smile:

- UNKNOWN (initial/default)
- NOT_RUNNING
- NOT_READY
- RECOVERING
- READY (desired state)

### Observation sources and information collected

- Kubernetes API
  - Pod is not Running and is one of CrashLoopBackOff, ImagePullBackOff, ContainerCreating and PendingAndUnschedulable
  - Pod is Running but lacking Ready status
  - Pod is Running and Ready

- KafkaAgent: It collects and expose Kafka metric [Broker State](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/3.7/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/BrokerState.java)
  - Broker state is 2 (RECOVERY)

>   - Broker state is not 2 (RECOVERY)

Reviewer 2: both "RECOVERY"? :thinking:

This is in line with the existing KafkaRoller because if the node is not running at all, then restarting it likely won't make any difference unless the node is out of date.
For example, if a pod is in pending state due to misconfigured affinity rule, there is no point restarting this pod again or restarting other pods, because that would leave them in pending state as well.
If the user then fixes the misconfigured affinity rule, then we should detect that the pod has an old revision, therefore should restart it so that the pod is scheduled correctly and runs.

`RECOVERING` nodes will be waited and observed only.
Like the existing KafkaRoller, we will avoid restarting a node during log recovery as doing so does not help the node recover more quickly.

`NOT_READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason and have not been restarted yet.
If it is not ready after being restarted already, we don't want to restart any other nodes to avoid taking down more nodes.

`READY` nodes will be restarted if they have a restart reason.
If they don't have a restart reason but need to be reconfigured, they will be reconfigured.

> If no reconfiguration is needed, then no action will be taken on these nodes.

Reviewer 2: I think for each state you should explain what the state represents before something/transition that it's going to happen because of something else (I see the usage of "will" to explain something is going to happen).
Then for each state you could explain with a bullet point list the possible transitions with corresponding action triggering them.

If all nodes reach the desired state, the reconciliation will succeed.

### High level flow diagram describing the flow of the states

> ![The new roller flow](./images/06x-new-roller-flow.png)

Author: This diagram is not accurate anymore. I wonder having this diagram is actually useful or not. Unless we can change it to something that actually adds value (which I don't think it does currently), I think we should remove this diagram.
